[Docs] Advanced networking documentation (#3166)
liqotech/liqo: docs/architecture/network/basic_example.md

# Pod-to-Pod Example

> Let's analyze and debug the complete path of an ICMP packet sent from a pod in the consumer cluster to a pod in the provider cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example presents the complete journey of an ICMP packet sent from a pod in a consumer cluster to a pod in a provider cluster.
```

## Setup

For this example, we will use two Kubernetes-in-Docker (KinD) clusters with only one worker each and Calico as the CNI.

The entire flow of the packet is depicted in the image below

![setup](../../_static/images/architecture/network/doc-example.drawio.svg)

Here are the details of the two clusters:

- **Cluster Rome (Local):**
  - **Pod:** `nginx-local` (`10.200.1.2`)
  - **Gateway:** `gw-local` (`10.200.1.3`)
  - **Node:** `rome-worker` (`172.18.0.2`)
- **Cluster Milan (Remote):**
  - **Pod:** `nginx-remote` (`10.200.1.4`)
  - **Gateway:** `gw-remote` (`10.200.1.5`)
  - **Node:** `milan-worker` (`172.18.0.3`)

Since both clusters use `10.200.0.0/16` as the pod CIDR, Liqo remaps the pod CIDR of the remote cluster to `10.201.0.0/16` on the local cluster.

This means that, from the perspective of the local cluster, the remote pod `nginx-remote` will appear to have the IP address `10.201.1.4`.

This examples follows the path of an ICMP Echo Request packet sent from `nginx-local` to `nginx-remote` using the command: `ping 10.201.1.4`.

## The packet flow

### Local Node

> The ICMP packet exits the pod's default interface (e.g. `eth0`) and immediately enters the worker node's root network namespace via the other end of the veth pair (e.g., `caliaaaaa`). The node must now decide where to send this packet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ICMP packet exits the pod's default interface (e.g. `eth0`) and immediately enters the worker node's root network namespace via the other end of the `veth` pair (e.g., `caliaaaaa`).
The node must now decide where to send this packet.
```

- **Policy Routing:** A custom policy [routing rule](routeconfiguration.md#remote-cluster-id-node-gw-node) matches the destination IP `10.201.0.0/16`. The matching rule is as follows: `10.201.0.0/16 via 10.71.0.3 dev liqo.00000`. This route sends the packet to a special interface named `liqo.00000`, which is a **GENEVE tunnel**.
- **Encapsulation:** This interface encapsulates the _entire L2 Ethernet frame_ (not just the IP packet) inside a new UDP packet.
  - **Inner Packet (Original):** `10.200.1.2` > `10.201.1.4`
  - **Outer Packet (New):**
    - **Source IP:** `172.18.0.2` (the `rome-worker` node)
    - **Destination IP:** `10.200.1.3` (the `gw-local` pod)
    - **Destination Port:** `6091` (the GENEVE port)

This new, larger UDP packet is then sent via the standard CNI network to the `gw-local` pod.

In this case, with just one node, the packet is sent directly to the `gw-local` pod, however in a multi-node cluster, the CNI may route it to another node first.

```{admonition} TIP

> To inspect the policy routing, use the command `ip rule show all` to find the correct table and `ip route show table <table_id>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To inspect the routing rules set by policy routing, use the command `ip rule show all` to find the correct table and then `ip route show table <table_id>`.
```

```

### Local Gateway

The encapsulated packet arrives at the gateway's default interface (e.g. `eth0`).

- **Decapsulation:** The gateway's networking stack recognizes the `6091` destination port and directs the packet to its own GENEVE interface (e.g., `liqo.11111`), which is paired with the worker's interface. The gateway strips the outer UDP/IP headers, extracting the original inner packet:
  > `SRC: 10.200.1.2` > `DST: 10.201.1.4`
- **DNAT (Destination NAT):** This packet's destination (`10.201.1.4`) is meaningless to the remote cluster. The gateway must translate it back to the pod's _real_ IP. This is done using **`nftables`**. A rule in the `remap-podcidr` table performs a Destination NAT:

>   > `ip daddr 10.201.0.0/16 ... dnat prefix to 10.200.0.0/16`

Reviewer 2: Added an {admonition} TIP  section with the command

- **Routing to WireGuard:** Now that the packet has its _real_ destination, it's routed to the inter-cluster tunnel. The [route](routeconfiguration.md#remote-cluster-id-gw-ext-gateway) is: `10.200.0.0/16 via 169.254.18.1 dev liqo-tunnel`

```{admonition} TIP
To know which is the other end of a GENEVE interface, use the command `ip -d link`, both ends must have the same ID.
```

### WireGuard Tunnel

The packet is sent to the `liqo-tunnel` interface, which is (by default) a **WireGuard** interface.

- **Encapsulation:** WireGuard encrypts the IP packet and wraps it in a new UDP packet for transport.
  - **Inner Packet (NATTed):** `10.200.1.2` > `10.200.1.4`
  - **Outer Packet:**
    - **Source IP:** `10.200.1.3` (the `gw-local` pod)
    - **Destination IP:** `172.18.0.3` (the `milan-worker` node, where `gw-remote` runs)
- **Node-Level SNAT:** This encrypted packet exits the `gw-local` pod and goes back to the `rome-worker` node. The node performs _another_ SNAT (Source NAT) to make the packet routable on the external network.
  - **Before SNAT:** `10.200.1.3:36252` > `172.18.0.3:31864`
  - **After SNAT:** `172.18.0.2:17806` > `172.18.0.3:31864`

> 

Reviewer: I would suggest to add that this second SNAT is done by the CNI, and has nothing to do with Liqo. It is actually done on all the packets that, from this cluster, go to the public Internet.

This final, encrypted, and twice-NATted packet now travels "across the internet" (or in this case, the Docker network) from `rome-worker` to `milan-worker`.

### Remote Node

The encrypted packet arrives at the `milan-worker`'s default interface (e.g. `eth0`).

> - **Node-Level DNAT:** Since the packet is addressed to the node itself, the node's kube-proxy intercepts it and performs a Destination NAT to send it to the `gw-remote` pod.

Reviewer: Idem.
Also here I would specify that this DNAT is performed by default by the CNI on all incoming packets, and has nothing to do with Liqo.

Reviewer 2: Clarified: this DNAT is performed by the node/CNI because the Remote Gateway is behind a NodePort Service
